Hi, Bill.
>> Hi, everybody. All right, this is the
board of finance special budget workshop
meeting, April 2nd, 2026.
It's 7:04. We're going to get started.
We'll start with the pledge of
allegiance. I pledge of allegiance to
the flag of the United States of
America.
>> Okay.
>> And to the republic for which it stands,
one nation under God, indivisible, with
liberty and justice for all.
>> Okay. Welcome, welcome, welcome.
So, uh, we were just chatting. We have
most of our board. We are missing Nick
for the moment. He's going to try to log
in, but he's got spotty Wi-Fi out on in
California, wherever he's at. So,
>> we have Liz.
>> We got him. Great. If we don't, we
don't.
>> Oh, there's Liz. Okay.
>> Yeah, Liz is here. We've got Liz, we've
got Kim, we've got Louise, right? Yep.
We've got Heather's here. Yep.
You're muted, Liz. Okay.
So, I think one of the things we want to
accomplish tonight is to go through the
budget one more time, make sure our
effects and figures are correct, make
sure we've got the right numbers that
are feeding into our presentation and
our overall in our tax rate calculation
and everything like that.
Um, and one of the issues I know Bill
and you and I had talked about, we
raised it a little bit last night, I
think, was the uh overtime, the public
works overtime thing.
>> Mhm. and we had kind of delegated you to
ask about that, get some more
information and come back on it. Um, do
we want to start there? Maybe.
>> Sure. Um, again, I don't know if anybody
else remembers or found anything in your
notes. I think Kimberly said you were
looking
>> Actually, shouldn't we start with public
speak?
>> That's what the agenda is.
>> Oh, I'm terribly sorry. You're you're
correct. I'm terribly sorry. I got the
recording thing at least. All right. Uh,
we'll go around. So, um, well, Lisa is
our treasurer, but Lisa, if you've got
anything to say. Nice try.
>> Okay, very good. Uh, Chris Nye,
>> public speak.
You have to unmute yourself, Chris, if
you're
okay. I'll come back to you, Carol.
Okay, I'll come back to you Joanne
real quick. Thank you everyone. Um,
just, you know, hoping that tonight
you're able to tighten up the expenses a
little bit here and there. Every little
bit counts. I know that tonight's
important. I wanted to point out, you
know, I know that everyone's been afraid
to make. I've made it no secret that I
think this budget is a little bit too
high, you know, to pass in the town and
so hoping it can be tightened up. Um,
want to also remember that all the years
that I can remember, there's always been
a contingency, which we've never dipped
into. There's been a surplus return to
the town every year. So, I mean, we've
been overbudgeted. So what I'm saying is
to the nervous part, you know, there's
if for say one or two lines you gamble
on and it ends up needing a little bit
more money, I think there'll be money to
transfer in. So to keep a budget so high
is kind of, you know, I don't think
worth doing that. I'm hoping you can cut
some more. I also wanted to, you know,
apologize. I had the town clerk um
assistant town clerk I sent an email
earlier today correcting myself you know
that had taken on you know some
significant raises in the past so it
looked you know in the past year so it
looked high apologies out there to that
person I wasn't trying to you know I
just wanted the figures to be right I'd
also like you to look into the town
planner um sorry that I'm bringing all
this up but I know this might be our
last time or whatever you can find out
um that was never really an employee in
the past that was a service. So, I feel
like, you know, it got an automatic 3%
raise there. I don't know if that's
needed. I know the gentleman that
performs those services was great. He
comes to some town meetings. He presents
like the affordable housing plan, the
POC plan, and I don't know if it's the
same person that's going to get that
raise, which amounts now to 49444
um from 48,000. So, I hope that's
solidified with a contract or whatever.
Um, I don't really think it's a town
employee. I could be wrong. And then,
um, just to remember that I think our
town charter has changed so that
whatever you all decide on and bring,
you know, to the town meeting, it's a
courtesy. You'll do your presentation.
people can make motions there to
decrease.
Um, but then this is going whatever you
decide on is going to a referendum.
I don't think we vote anymore as a town
whether to accept your final thing. I
think it's kind of um, you know, and
apologize, I'm coming down with
something, but um, I think it's kind of
a formality. So, it's really important
that you do your due diligence on
whatever cuts you think you wanted to
make because I don't think you can. It's
coming back to you after that town
meeting. It's going straight to
referendum. Thank you. Good luck.
>> Thank you, Joanne.
Uh
let's see. Uh Marcy,
>> hi. Um, I just wanted to uh comment on
the uh town planner. Uh, I really hope
you don't touch that because our town
has been falling behind all the other
towns around and we really finally
started feel like we're kind of trying
to get somewhere with planning for our
town for the future. And there's there's
a there's a lot of value for the town
planner. So, please don't touch them.
All right. Thank you. Bye.
>> Okay, I'll circle back to a couple of
the people um who had called on before.
Um Oh, actually, wait. Scott Sadette.
>> Hey. Um I just wanted to get on and say
I hope you don't reduce the school
budget. Uh it is I know it sounds high,
but looking at what they've done for the
last decade, and they are not too high.
And I looked at the lawyers letters, the
dueling lawyer letters, and one of them
is very clear and very straightforward
and very easy to read and very
understandable. And the other one is
parsing the words about um in all sorts
of thing. I'm forgetting the word here,
recommendation, trying to parse that
into meaning something very different.
Um so I just want to say I think this
board needs to be very careful about
that.
That's it. Thank you.
>> Thanks, Scott.
All right.
Wait a minute. Did we lose some people?
>> We have Val also.
>> Yeah, I'm gonna get to Val. I see.
>> Okay.
>> Um I just I'm sorry. I was looking. Did
we lose Carol? I think we did.
>> I see.
>> Yeah, Alicia just joined. Uh Valerie, do
you have public comment for us before we
start?
>> Hi, thanks. I just was going to echo um
the same sentiments that um Scott uh
said. Um you did a great presentation
last night. You brought a lot of things
to light. I think it's also, you know,
definitely worth us noting that um we
have a budget for the whole town to
consider um both sides there and we had
a lot of years of loss that we need to
try to recoup a little bit of now. So,
thank you.
>> Okay. Uh, Alicia,
>> I just wanted to say I appreciate all
your guys' hard work and I also support
the school budget and with needing the
extra sixth grade teacher, I feel like
it's really important. Thank you.
>> Thank you. Uh, okay. Let's see. I I I
think we lost a couple people. Um maybe
they'll come back, but there's another
round of public speak at the end. So
I guess uh if there's no one else
hearing none, we'll proceed.
So thanks for reminding me, Louise, to
do that. All right. Uh back to
going through the budget. Uh, I thought
we'd just get the the public works thing
out of the way and then we can maybe
circle back and and look at everything
else.
>> Are you going to bring it up um and
share it?
>> Yeah, one second. Hang on a second. I I
want to find it. There it is.
>> There it is.
Okay. I don't know why it's being so
difficult. There we go.
>> Is this the overtime question?
>> Yeah.
>> So, we talked about it last night, but I
just wanted to make sure we were done.
And
>> Kim, I think you said you might have had
notes that you were to check. I don't
know if you did or not.
your v you're muted, Kim.
>> Sorry about that, Bill. I did not find
my notes on this. I'm sorry. I did
check.
>> But I I am pretty sure that we we
decided this because we looked at the um
actual expenditures.
>> Yeah.
>> And agreed on, you know, it was a five.
It was a minimal deduction. I mean, it's
not high amount anyway. We also I think
we compared this to the con the overtime
for the snow removal. There's two
different spots. It's I'm thinking it
through.
>> And we felt like we could reduce the
upper line because this was that's a
significant
um line item if I remember correctly.
I'm just thinking.
>> Yeah. I mean, the thing is, we know
we're over this year on snow removal OT.
Uh, that number budgeted number is up. I
think it's just up%.
>> Yeah. Okay.
>> So, I mean, I don't know if this is the
end of the world one way or the other,
but
>> I thought I'd raise it. We cut a request
for 135 down to five,
>> right? um you know if we're comfortable
with that I I don't have a huge problem
with it but you know the explanation we
got from public works remind me Bill
again was
>> um just they a lot of times get called
out and a perfect example came up uh two
weeks ago where a tree fell across their
road on a Saturday and it you know ended
up having two a large tree you know two
workers had to come out on a Saturday
got overtime for that um they were up
there for a couple hours and then Um,
you know, he talks about how that
happens quite a bit. I know on on Bear
Swamp, it seems to happen at least twice
a year where we get a large tree that
falls across the street. I don't know
where else it happens. And then whenever
there's construction work where we hire
an outside contractor, we have people on
site the whole time. So, if you have a
contractor that works to 4 or 5:00,
we'll have road crew there the whole
time. They don't go home at the normal
time, I guess. So, that's where some of
the overtime comes in as well. And I I
forget some of the other things he
talked about, but he he did mention
quite a few things where um overtime
outside of snow overtime is uh is there.
So I don't know why it's such a big
increase this year from you know looks
like 3500 on average 3,3500 up to 135
but we did look at it and cut it to
five. I don't know if we cut it too much
or not or if that's a good number.
>> Do you want to raise it up to six? I
have another exact number in my head.
>> I had I had six in my head. I was just
thinking maybe just go to six.
>> Why don't we just Why don't you know I
mean if if it has to they need money for
overtime, we're going to find figure it
out, right?
>> Yeah.
>> My thought is my thought is like we're
looking at the previous year's history.
>> Yeah.
>> It's really the jump was pretty high in
what he's asking for. I think if there's
something that happens, there's other
money if a transfer needs to be made.
>> If I can interject, I think we also went
back and a high amount was budgeted for
the other years and we never used it. I
think yeah,
>> I'm I'm looking now, but it's like it
wasn't a big jump from 24 to 25. Actual
was very low, but I think we asked for
about the same amount those other two
years and we never used it. I think I
mean that's my memory.
>> So that's why I thought everybody
decided I think decided to just bring it
down.
>> It sounds right.
>> I say we leave it.
>> Okay. I'm I'm good with
>> Yeah, I don't have I don't have a
problem with it. I just wanted to talk
it out.
>> Yeah, I think adding another thousand.
I mean really
>> you know the point about contingency is
also correct. We basically never touched
that. um
>> you know notwithstanding I believe we
used 2,000 of it this year but
>> y so in case that we actually do need to
go over that where would we pull that
from?
>> Well if assuming there's no within the
same general part of the budget like
public works assuming there's nothing
under expended that they can do a
transfer.
>> Okay,
>> then we would probably pull from
contingency.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay.
So the only other number
>> I know in the past we've had we've had
within a department
>> lines that are over and lines that are
under.
>> Yeah.
>> And you're allowed to
>> move it around.
>> Move it around.
>> The only other one I looked at was the
uh large increase on the meals for um
voter registration times. And she had a
pretty good explanation. you know, is a
large increase. But she had a pretty
good explanation again because we have a
Democratic and Republican uh caucus this
year as well as the election and because
of early voting and mailing ballots,
there's a lot more people and a lot more
hours being worked and that's why they
increased the meals
um line there so much.
That's the explanation I got. Anyways,
>> yeah, they definitely we've expanded
uh the voting. Uh where is that? I must
have scrolled past. There it is.
The assessor registers elections to the
meals here.
>> Yeah, it's $1,000.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah, it's a high percentage, but
>> yeah, it went from $500 it looks like,
right? Up to 3,000. So,
>> uh that's true. If you look at actuals,
you're right.
>> Yeah.
Well, we'll see how that goes. And
>> if it's too much, we can reduce it next
year. But it's a thousand bucks.
>> I had something I wanted to look at,
too.
>> Okay.
>> Go up to the top just so that we can
This is all revenue. There we go.
>> I was concerned and um actually
>> this is wrong now. But all right. This
was my looking into this was based on an
email that we received. Um I was a
little concerned about the
drivers/dispatch
salary. I know we talked about this and
the budgeted amount is 46,680.
>> Which line are we on?
>> We I'm sorry. 143100.
>> Do you Excel number that is or
>> Oh 36.
>> Oh, way up top. Okay. way up top. Hold
up. I go I went past it. Wait, 36?
>> It's 36. It's I mean in the budget I'm
looking at the Rob budget board budget.
>> Sweet.
>> Okay.
>> Oh, you know what? This is I'm sorry.
This is preliminary salaries. The prelim
>> over here. You mean this one?
>> The prelim the preliminary salaries.
>> Got it. It's a tab. Yeah, it's another
tab. It's the third tab.
>> Yep. So,
>> uh, I don't have this written down, but
the email reminded me that, uh, I think
we talked about
the Miss Patcher. So, right now it's um,
what's her name? The registar.
Democratic re registar.
>> Linda.
>> Linda. Linda. Yes. Linda Derek. Um,
I believe they talked about
paying her for 10 hours a week still at
$20 an hour to remain being the
dispatcher. Is that true?
>> No. No. Kim is now doing that. Linda is
no longer doing that.
>> Oh, Kim is doing Is Kim getting paid?
>> Yes.
>> She's getting paid to do it?
>> Okay. So, she's getting paid 10 hours a
week at $20 an hour to do that, right?
>> That's right.
>> Okay. So, that being the case, if you uh
the drivers
salaries,
that is all we have here. This 46680,
if you look at this, this is about a 3%
increase. And that
uh 3% is reflective of the four drivers
only.
So, another 10,400 would need to be
added to that unless unless
>> I think that was in the um community um
the senior community center information.
>> I looked Yeah, I looked for that there.
You did? So,
>> I think we found that down there.
>> Yeah. Where was it?
>> Did we? So, if you scroll up in this
tab,
>> sorry, in this tab. Yep.
>> Yep. And there's uh
>> what did I say? Uh
>> yeah, not that one.
>> Should be 10,400.
>> Are we seeing that anywhere? I just
don't want to leave anybody off.
>> That's all.
>> I do not I'm going to go back to the
other tab for a second.
>> I don't see it either.
>> So I see the community center assistant.
I see that. right there.
She just dractor assistant conference
center.
>> Yeah, there's no line here under the
community center on the main chart for
>> drivers.
>> I thought she talked about it, but I
can't remember where it is. So last year
I went into last year's budget and f and
looked under the employee tab and I
could see the four employees and their
salaries, you know, through all the the
columns. And that's how I I was at least
able to verify that, you know, the the
3% is correct. The 46680 is close to
correct. Yeah, it's it's Yeah, it's
close. Um, and that tracks through from
last year, but I don't see where the uh
dispatcher is included in here.
And I think it's supposed to be included
on this line. The way it's written,
drivers slashdispatch salary.
>> I think they were supposed to be clumped
together. Oh, wait a minute. Here's
another tab. Employee. Oh, no. I put
that one in there. Never mind.
So that it was a large jump though from
from 33 to 45 from 24 25 to 25 26 it's
not included in that I wasn't here then
so I don't know but the actual spend
>> in 2425 was only 33 and the budget last
year was 45
>> right I see that
>> so I don't I don't know
>> I don't know why the actuals would have
been below 24 25. I know we have four,
>> but that's what I'm saying. Maybe maybe
that 33 didn't include the dispatch and
previous year's dispatch was somewhere
else, but they added it in 25 26 to make
that come up to 45. I don't know.
>> Liz, how much would that be the hours
times the dollars? How much would that
be a year
>> for what the dispatcher or for the
>> the new the new line that you're saying?
>> 10 grand.
>> 10,400 be 10,ou 10,400.
So it looks like it might have just been
added to that line 143 100 maybe.
>> But if Liz say the problem the only
problem with that because like it would
make sense except Liz is saying she went
and she verified the driver salaries
from last year, right?
>> Yep. So the driver salaries last year
were
uh for 2425 were $44,000
and the 20 So
>> the budget the budget figure
>> the budgeted the budgeted for one two
three four for four drivers
um it's possible that maybe they didn't
drive as much because they're hourly.
They drive as needed as the people need
that that could be why it came in lower.
But if you take um actually I take that.
>> So uh
>> Oh wait, no I'm wrong. I'm wrong. The
the proposed last year was 45,320,
>> which is Yep. It's in here.
>> 45,320. And if you take that and you add
3% to that, you get the 46780.
>> I got I got an email from Joanne that
said her
>> That's why I'm bringing it up. Joanne
said that it was added to the community
center assistant line.
If you go back
>> added to the community center assistant
>> assistant line is what Joanne saying.
>> Guys, can I speak real quick?
>> Why would we put it there?
>> Yeah,
>> there was two positions put in that line
>> and that's why something I think uh cuz
look at the difference.
>> Yeah, because it's 32,000 versus 10,000.
Now I want to look at my notes from when
I talked to Tess.
>> Community center assistant.
>> I thought you guys raised the community
center assistant because you wanted more
hours for a real assistant, not someone
time. I don't think that had to do with
the driver.
>> That's what I thought too, Lisa.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I don't think that's driver
related
>> or dispatch related.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Guys, I'm gonna pop out, but
if you read my email that I sent
earlier, it gave you the figures that I
heard them talk in the meeting. There's
two position. Now, there's three people
that are going to work at the community
center,
>> right?
>> Um, and that's that's why I brought this
up.
>> Thank you. Right. And so, you have the
director at her new contract that they
signed. Then you have the person doing
transportation
20 $20 an hour, 10 hours, and then they
decided on $25 an hour times 15 hours
for an assistant. I think if you add all
of those up, you'll come to that 325.
>> That's and that would be 195. Okay. So
195 plus that would be 29.90 would be
>> right. I didn't put Yep. Thank you.
>> 29,900.
Okay. And so in the community center
assistant, what's the total there?
>> 2025.
>> It kind of makes sense.
>> Yeah.
>> So maybe Okay.
>> Okay. I guess that makes sense then.
>> Can we add that uh to the notes that
that's the
>> Yes. Dispatcher, please?
>> Yep. Yes.
Thank you, Joanne.
>> No problem.
I was looking at the reverse. I was
going down and saying
>> over to the side.
>> Yeah. To the right that it includes the
>> includes dispatcher.
Dispatcher at 10,400 and AD at 195.
Although it's
>> that it's still 2990 or something like
that. It's a little
>> Yeah, but that's 290. That's
>> that's okay.
Yeah. So I I at least on my chart, but
Lisa's got the the one that matters.
>> Yeah, I I put it included includes
dispatcher.
>> Okay, great.
>> I added that for you.
>> Although I don't remember that, but
>> the math works.
>> The math works.
>> Math works.
>> Yep.
>> Yeah.
>> Good catch.
>> There you go.
Good catch all around.
>> Takes the village.
>> Okay.
Rob, do we have any more word on on how
we're going to handle the RAM?
I sent it I sent you guys right when I
got home.
I saw an email that went around to the
board chairs and people in in the towns
and I forwarded it to you guys right at
six o'clock.
>> It's a memo. It talks about how it's
honestly I'm a little confused. First
they did what the Hebrin board chair had
asked them to do which is calculate
interest. So the numbers a little
different now. Um, you know, I think
we're getting 258 and change instead of
255.
I'm still not 100% clear how they're
hand planning to handle this. They say
they're going to do an offset. They're
going to take it off our levy, but how
they're handling it literally for the
purposes of the referendum is still a
little unclear to me. They have a
meeting Monday night they've put
together at 6:30.
I would suggest any of us who can make
that
try. When did you say it? Monday at
6:30.
>> Monday at 6:30. It's the link is in
there's a link to a Zoom.
>> Yep. Yep.
>> I would I I will try to make it, but
I'll be late. I have my kids that night.
I I don't get home till 6:45.
So, you know, anybody who can make it
and kind of ask my question, the
question I was trying to get at is what
number are they going to show when the
people go to vote?
I understand that we're going to get
money back and I trust that that'll
happen. What I want to know is because I
don't think it should be netted out on
the ballot.
>> I don't either.
>> No, either.
>> Um Valerie did just forward. I don't
know if she sent it to everybody, but I
just got the levy sheet from Valerie.
>> Yeah, I forwarded it too. Didn't you get
Okay,
>> I got it too.
Yeah. Shouldn't
we still reduce it?
>> I think we should just reduce that line
item by that amount
>> with X to it.
>> So what I would say guys is that on the
chart that that we recalculate um
the the taxation level.
>> So do am I sharing this? Can you seeing
it? Did I switch charts? Okay.
So this here, obviously this number is
now wrong, but and this this whole line
needs to get changed because they
changed their levy too. But see there's
a blank there's an extra line under
here. What I would do personally
is I'd put it, you know, equals this
minus, you know, and
>> I don't think you're sh I don't think
you're sharing it, Rob.
>> All right. I think I'm sharing I know
what I did. I know what I did. I want to
fix the screen share. Give me a second.
I know what I did wrong.
I shared a document instead of a screen.
Okay, so this this document which I've
you know I've been playing around with
this so don't take this this document as
gospel at all. Do you see it? This is
where we calculate you know tax
increase. This number I haven't put the
RAM offset in. This is why it's still
showing a 9.35 you know and this number
here you know this is the levy number
that used to be but they've adjusted it
again. But what I was saying is
I want to show their true number which
isn't this anymore. It's like 41,
etc., etc. And then I want to take
>> actually it's more than that
>> because you're forgetting you got to add
that capital in there. So it's really
4258178.
>> So remember you you got to add the
63,000 capital that they added.
>> That's what you added to come to that
42.
>> So you're talking about if I'm looking
at this right Yeah. 4,194.
>> Oh yeah. Yeah. So it's but you got
>> you have to add the 63 250.
>> Yeah.
>> Which I believe 584
928. So you're right. You're correct. Of
course you are. Um
>> no.
>> So this one
is actually 4258178.
And then
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. And then what I would do is say,
you know, equals this minus
uh
where's the memo?
Uh 2588761587615,
>> right? And we tax based off this number
here.
So, this number, you know, I'd have to
I'd have to make sure this propagates
down. It doesn't right now. This just
looks back up here.
>> Wait, I'm confused. I'm confused. You
just can you go back there? Why are we
prop taxing at 399? You just town.
>> So, this here this here is the I just
thought I put in the the full RAM levy
is this 4,258,178,
right?
>> That's our new the new levy that they
just told us. Okay.
>> Yeah. If you look at the this this is
the chart they just sent to round.
>> Okay.
>> I don't know if you guys can see this
very well here. Let me
>> Yep. That's okay. I can
>> Okay. So, if you look at Andover
proposed 2627, you've got this number
here,
>> but there's also the capital number
here.
>> You tally that and that.
>> I don't like I don't like that they
never tally it.
>> Well, the thing is too is that's only
like $5,000. They changed their tuition
amount also. If you look up top, their
tuition amount changed. So, I guess I
don't understand what $5,000 has to do
with a $250,000 change.
>> No, no, no, no, no. I'm talking about
the offset that we're getting back down
here.
>> Yeah.
>> So, I'm saying all right, if this is the
levy, this plus this.
>> Yeah,
>> that's the levy. Okay. So back to the
right trade. So this number here
>> Mhm.
>> is now the letby. This is the two added
up, right? Two 4258178.
>> You agree?
>> Yes. Yeah. It just doesn't have anything
to do with this new thing that they
found though because it's not very much
money.
>> It's like $5,000. It's not anything to
do with this problem that they have, is
it? Because that's just a change of
$5,000,
>> right? That's a separate that's a
separate thing. They adjusted the levy.
>> Okay. So, they're still changing their
>> There's two things going on here. They
adjusted their levy slightly.
>> Okay.
>> And they adjusted our offset slightly to
calculate some interest payments.
So, this number here is what I net out
the, you know, their levy number and
then the money we're getting back. I
don't care how we do it and how we
display it per se if people want to do
it differently. My point is it's this
number here.
This 399930185
is the net between the levy that they
want from us this year and the money
they owe us.
>> Oh, I see. Okay. The question is that's
the net, right?
>> That's the net. I don't want this on the
ballot. I want this on the ballot.
>> Right. But this is the number we should
tax off of.
>> That's what I'm saying. the we should
tax on the 4,258.
>> I just I don't think so. No, I think we
should account for the the offset figure
coming in.
>> What would you do?
>> Well, just you know
>> I think we should show I think we should
show the true cost to the town. True
cost.
>> Yeah. Um
>> I want this in the budget for sure. This
here the the true cost number,
>> right?
Right? Because that's going to calculate
down and it's going to tell us our true
>> our true total by taxation,
>> right?
>> I mean, I'm not an accountant, so I kind
Why do I keep wanting to call you, Lynn?
I think Lisa should chime in. I mean, do
we
>> take that money in?
>> I'm just kind of surprised that they're
still making changes, this $5,000 change
and the change to listen after you've
already brought this to a hearing.
I I I'm just really surprised at that.
Um the offset thing I understand is
something they just found, but
>> how many more meetings are they going to
have changing their figure before you
bring it to town meeting?
>> It's going down. I'm not going to
complain too much, but
>> Well, you don't have to master sheet
that you're trying to keep track of,
>> right? And you're not get I'm not
getting these emails. Rob just sent it
to me. So, um
>> Oh, geez.
Um,
boy, you're you're getting kind of
complicated, too, because don't forget
you have the two the two mill rates,
too, because of the vehicle and the
other. If you get that high, I'm
>> Yeah, I understand.
>> We should still address that tonight.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> If if we
if we would tax on the lower amount,
then
>> would we reach the other I thought that
too, Heather. I'm like, well, maybe if
you
>> Right. you wouldn't reach the two
separate but I don't know
>> right that's
>> and then but then does that just cause a
problem next year because then it looks
like we have a huge increase when it
when there's no offset
>> it's going to look a bigger increase
next year but the point is what we're be
taxed on this year is the new lower
amount it might get us closer to that
level where we don't have the two
separate bill rates for autos and houses
and then maybe we can look again at
either um capital expenditures or the uh
general
um money that having a general budget,
the extra money, get them get it down to
a level where we can go to the town with
one mill rate is I think what our goal
should be, not two separate mill rates.
So between the the reduced levy and
monies that we can take from either
capital and overor our general money
that we have the extra money in, we
should be able to
get us to that level.
I guess I would want to know hear more
about how they're going to do this. Are
they going to
send us this offset in one year? Because
I wouldn't I wouldn't think we'd be able
to take the whole amount off if it's
going to be a gradual thing that they're
going to return to us. That's just my
thought.
>> That's a good point, Lisa.
>> You know, it's like if it we know we're
going to get that, but I don't think we
can take it off of the tax rate this
year for all of it if we're not going to
get it. We're going to get it in five
years. 15.
>> They owe it to us right now. They owe us
the money right now. I thought the levy
was going to be lowered by that much
money.
>> Yeah, they say they're doing offset. Um,
let me look at the
>> I interject. Yes,
>> I know I'm not on the board. Um,
>> you are on the board of uh of
>> I'm on the RAM board. Yeah.
>> The plan the plan as I understood it was
that it would just reduce this year's
levy.
>> That's what I would think.
>> Okay. Simplify the whole thing was going
to reduce the the current year's levy to
the towns.
>> That makes the most sense.
>> I'm quite sure that was the plan.
>> Why?
>> Go ahead.
>> I don't see how it how it helps because
then next year our RAM levy is going to
look so much higher.
>> Well, I would I would want to still
display their levy as the true number.
>> We have to show
>> and have the offset as a separate thing.
>> Yeah. So it won't look like
>> that's what I'm saying. Yeah. Yeah, I
don't want to mask what
>> I think we're on the same page there.
>> I just don't think we should tax based
on
the higher number without offset. I I
think we should display it though. Like
here's what it would be. We're getting
this oneshot repayment.
It gives us a break, but it's a oneshot
deal.
>> And then next year we it shows here's
what this year's levy was.
>> This is the true levy. Yeah.
>> Right. So, I would like I want like a
separate line that says offset or
something.
>> Exactly. We should put that in.
>> Good idea.
>> By the way, guys, to get down by by
really quick and dirty math here on the
spreadsheet, to get down to the unified
mill rate, we got to find like $560,000
>> in addition to the 255, 258,
>> something like that.
>> No, sorry. So, hang on.
>> That's right. I didn't incorporate that.
So my point is we should be able to
>> one mill rate.
>> If I'm doing the math right, it's 300
we'd need to find
>> to get down to a unified mil rate.
I mean honestly, all right, that that
can be a goal. I don't have a problem
with that. I don't know if that's the
end all be all, but that's the number
because if this is
and I want to verify this number is even
right anymore. Total be raised by taxes
um
because we made some changes and I'm not
sure they propagated over to this chart.
This chart is a separate chart. So I'm
not 100% confident in this number. So
this is all a little fuzzy math. Okay.
But if you take the total by taxation,
you take
uh sorry, you take the not the total
raise by taxation, sorry, the total
grand list and you apply the mill rate,
the top mill rate you can do before
splitting it, you get this much in
revenue, 10,379,96791,
that would be your target
for taxation if you wanted to keep one
mill rate. If I again I'm applying the
mill rate to to the the total grand list
number that I have in here assuming this
is correct which I believe it is came
this came from Lisa
>> who I haven't had a chance to update yet
so just so you're
>> okay okay I didn't know if that but it's
grand list I don't know that it would
change at this point right
>> grand list won't change your correct
list won't change
>> the rest of it yeah I mean I don't trust
I don't trust my two raised to be raised
by taxes number because I don't trust
the total expenditure number anymore
because we've been changing stuff on the
other chart and it does not feed this
chart. So, this this number has to be re
checked.
>> Rob, do you want do you want to add that
row now so you don't forget?
>> Yeah, just add the row in there.
>> Make a quick note of it now because
>> Yeah,
>> because I do agree with Liz that it
would like a it would offset what we're
seeing next year and make it look like a
much bigger increase. So, we just want
>> Yeah, and Liz and I were talking about
this earlier. I completely agree. Um, I
absolutely agree. I do not want to
We can call it something like that.
>> Yeah, that's good.
>> And
>> let's have a record of what you did.
>> Ram
Mnet
27.
Sorry, I'm desperately trying to get
mine to come up and I'm not having any
luck getting it to come up.
>> Of course not. Of course.
>> Of course not.
>> Uh, but just conceptually, I would like
it to look like something like this,
right?
>> So, everybody can see that topline
number. That's their real number. That's
the number that's really costing the
town to make their budget work. And then
this, everybody has to understand is a
oneshot deal to fix the mistake.
And then why is that? This is just Yeah.
Currency.
No.
>> Why isn't this coming up?
>> There we go.
>> Okay. So that way it's clearer. We can
display it properly. But you know,
I think the amount to be raised by
taxation and again this is still we got
to double check this that gets you to
that's how we get to roughly 6.8 eight,
the number we were talking about last
night
to for taxation this year,
you know, and then yes, you do have the
issue of next year this goes away.
But as I read, you know, my read of the
email is uh and again you guys have it
now too, but they're having this
meeting. We can go ask questions.
So Scott, if you're still there, can I
ask you another quick question?
>> Why is he still messing?
Yes. And you can ask a question now that
I'm mute.
>> The the the other thing we were talking
about the very very small change to the
levy itself.
>> 5,000.
>> What was that about?
>> I that I don't know. I
that gets sent to all the chairs and
stuff, but didn't make it to us. Um
probably only the chair and one other
board member actually know the details
of that.
>> I can see if I can find out as you guys
are talking.
>> Wouldn't you have to vote on it to to
phone?
>> Probably. We got a meeting on Monday
though. So um
>> Okay. Okay.
Okay. So it's provisional.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah. But but you know if if we found
you know that you know that much money
we would there's almost no question the
board would vote on it would accept it.
>> No I'm not even talking about the
offset. I'm talking about the the slight
difference in the proposed levies up top
>> because it was 4199204
and now
>> it's about $5,000. 5,000 bucks. It's not
a lot,
>> right?
>> Tuition is different also. Tuition was
>> and now it's 355
399.
>> So that's different.
>> Yeah, tuition might have changed. I I
think I know how tuition changes because
um they got
that there is an extra student coming in
um
that what wasn't planned and they had
kind of accepted last minute for for
next year
>> and those are they're charged 15,000
ahead, right?
>> Yeah.
Yeah. So, so you know from Colombia
student
>> that lowers our percentage
>> that that lowers the the total number
and our our fact but but that shouldn't
count for 5,000 because we're not
15.
>> Yeah. So I'm not quite sure of of all
that. But part of I think part of what
happened with the levy is that you know
the the money that's in that account is
in an interestbearing
>> Yes.
>> Yeah.
>> account. That was why this is
>> right
>> because I know the board of finance
chair in Hebrin asked that question very
pointedly. What about interest?
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. The funny thing about interest
though of course is you know the towns
are paying it. If we give it back to the
towns the towns are still you know
>> Yeah.
>> The only source of you know of income
really for this is come is the town. So,
it's a funny thing.
>> It was sitting in an account. I don't
know what account earns for interest.
You know, I know if it was in our
general fund, it'd be in the stiff
account. So,
>> yeah, we we have a stiff account, too.
And I don't know exactly which funds are
in the stiff account. You know, what's
in there, but I'm guessing that's that's
why we have interest is is going through
that, you know, but but the money you
make in the stiff account isn't, you
know,
>> it's better than it's better than it
was. Better than it was. Yeah, exactly.
It's not nothing. It's certainly better
than nothing, but it's it's not going to
make or break anything,
>> right?
>> But yeah, I actually 5,000 I don't know.
And tuition increase would would help
reduce our
our levy by a little bit, but not not by
that much for one student. Unless there
were two. There were two. That would be
about right.
I knew about one. Maybe then maybe
there's been a second one.
>> Okay.
Okay.
>> So again, it's got this number here.
These have to be carried over to the the
main budget, right?
>> That's what I was just going to say. So
am I changing Ram's budget even outside
of the offset?
Well, I would change the levy figure.
>> We We Well, we have to show it in the in
the main budget so that we come up with
the right
>> Well, I I see your point about maybe not
changing it until Tuesday.
>> Yeah.
>> Change it or Wednesday when we have our
next meeting,
>> right? Right. If they vote Monday night
to to agree with this spreadsheet,
then we could have Lisa update the
charts with that figure, that whopping,
you know, $5,000 difference to get the
numbers right.
>> The whole thing, the whole adjustment,
the 255.
>> Oh, yeah. The adjustment as well, but
Oh, sorry. I say there's two different
things. Yeah.
>> On the main budget sheet, we have to
show this new RAM number.
>> Yeah. So, here's the thing, Lisa. Where
would you do? I mean, I'm thinking it
goes under revenue or something.
>> No, you sure what the new RAM budget is?
>> Well, the new RAM budget 5,000 if Do you
want to keep the budget the offset
separate?
>> The offset's a different thing. I want
that on a separate line is what I'm
saying.
>> If anything,
>> I don't know if I'd put it up in
revenue, but would you put it down here
before a capital budget on the bottom
where it says um where it says
expenditures on the very bottom?
Keep going down.
Yeah. See where it says municipal RAM
AES? Insert a line number 491. Make that
an offset line and move everything down
one line.
>> Oops.
>> Something like Yeah, something like
that. I mean, it's not up above, but
it's in your end net.
Like, do Yeah,
>> has to be a negative obviously,
>> right?
>> Yay. I'll get to that. I have to get the
what number again because I can't
remember.
>> There it is.
>> But won't that mask the true?
>> Well, the whole reason I'm trying to do
it on a separate line is to avoid doing
that.
>> That's why we're showing the two lines.
We're adding that new line so we show
the true number up above.
I guess my question is but then it's
gonna net
>> ram offset one time one time offset
>> because otherwise people might think
it's an annual discount. I don't know.
>> Yeah. And the date
>> doesn't
doesn't that change the to the grand
total expenditure line though? So it's
going to
>> it does and that's why I don't
necessarily want it there. So, do you
want it is that why you want it in the
revenue line as
>> Yeah. I mean, don't you think it's
revenue?
>> Am I crazy for thinking it's revenue?
>> No, of course. I don't I'm not used to
the way Andover tracks revenue. Um,
>> if we took if we took money back from
the 2% I mean not 2% surplus money from
education in your mind, where would you
reflect that, Lisa? in the general
budget, right?
>> That would be an adjust that would be an
adjustment after the audit is as far as
because that that won't be determined
till after the audit. So that's kind of
like a budget adjustment after the fact
is the only way I've seen it with a
surplus so that your starting balance
for the next year is less.
So it didn't really it doesn't really
affect the year you're in because you
don't know it until after you've been
audited.
So then we it would affect our next
year's number and our next year's number
is going to look like
>> in an audit. Yes.
>> In an audit, but not here, Liz.
>> Okay. In an audit, yes. Yeah.
>> But not necessarily in the budget.
>> Correct.
>> So can we
>> can you just put it under the shortage
overage or something? Add it in there
and then have another one.
>> Okay. People, I just looked it up for
AI. Gotta love AI. It says errors and
omissions in a town budget are typically
managed through a specific overlay
account
in parentheses or overlay reserve or a
general contingency reserve fund. These
accounts are designated for
extraordinary unforeseen expenses or
inaccuracies in the tax levy such as tax
abatements, exceptions or errors in tax
billing.
So would that fall
>> into that category? I'm I'm thinking no.
>> No, I don't think that fits.
>> I mean, it's an idea, but it's kind of
like if like what happened in my
previous job, Rob is gonna die. The
board of finance GR actually made a
$100,000 mistake in the capital and I
found it and it was after it was voted
on because it was not my worksheet and
he thought he he came in with his home
equity book and thought he was going to
have to come up with $100,000.
Somehow the first selectment at the time
said, "Well, we'll do this, this, and
this from these other funds and we'll be
okay. We'll be fine." That's the kind of
mistake that I'm thinking would apply to
what you're talking about.
>> Okay?
>> Because it's something that's already
been voted on and and then find out
that, you know, there was an error in
doing the spreadsheet.
>> Um I don't know if you'd apply this to
it or not. I'm not saying you can't.
>> Um
>> what if I did it this way? You have to
account for it,
>> right?
>> Yeah.
>> What if I did it this way under there's
a line for revenue for Ramy? Yes. What
if we put a line here
so it goes into revenue? I know it's not
maybe strictly speaking revenue. I
understand why you could have a
philosophical thought of, well, it's not
really revenue. They're paying us back
for a mistake.
But from the standpoint of getting
things netted out so that we know
what the call what you know what we're
dealing with. I don't know maybe this is
the
way to do it.
I mean whichever way we do it wherever
we put it I think it's its own special
line that it's because it's a oneshot
thing. own special line and at some
point it just has to be taken off
the
>> so
>> total taxation
>> if we're look when we're doing this next
year will the 2000 will the 2026 27
budget request say like for expenditures
13.6 or should 13
>> say 13.688. Yeah, it should be this one
up here, right?
>> Because that's the true number. That's
the number,
>> right? So you
It'll still be there. We'll still know
>> because we we will still be able to plan
based on the real number, right?
>> That's why I don't want to screw with
this number.
>> Yeah, I want that number.
>> We don't actually
>> And we don't actually plan based on the
budgeted amount anyway. We based we plan
based on the actual amount,
>> right?
>> Sure. I I like to know both, but you're
correct.
>> Good to look at the actuals.
>> Could it be another line? Like you have
a grand total expenditures, grand total
revenue, and then a one time line RAM
offset. Yeah, you could put it all by it
onesies.
>> It's just something one off.
>> That would be fine. And I mean, as long
as we all agree on it and Lisa is
comfortable with it,
>> then I'm okay with that.
>> I I don't
>> I don't have a real strong attachment.
As long as it's own it's its own thing.
So that
>> I kind of like that actually. I like
that separate from the revenue. Yeah.
Make it its own little
>> line section down below because then
you're really separating it and saying
this is once. Ah,
I know what I did wrong there.
>> Again, as long as it stays under the RAM
heading, that's all that really matters.
So, we know where it came from,
>> right?
>> And it shows.
Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.
That's wrong, sir.
>> Z control Z.
>> There we go.
And then this
I don't love Excel.
>> No, that's wrong. I did that the wrong
way.
S doesn't like it. But it's throwing a
little error bar at me, but I think
that's actually right.
>> Yeah, I think that's great.
So this these are so these remain tred
up and then this is its own little
thing.
>> I don't know I don't know how I feel
about exactly how this is characterized
but
>> should we do an adjusted grand total
revenue after that time after that uh
onetime offset?
>> Yeah,
>> that's actually a really good idea.
>> Yeah.
>> Then we see the actual amount
>> and you don't get all those negatives,
>> right?
That's what I get.
876. That's right. Right. 87615.
Whatever. Okay.
Oh, it is. It is there. It's just
these numbers are
>> doesn't have
>> currency.
It doesn't show. Okay. I was going to
say it doesn't show the pennies on
>> you got to just around it.
>> I was just being a pain. I was just
being a pain. That's probably not worth
doing.
>> It's not worth doing.
>> Yeah.
>> You have to go through the whole line.
So that is kind of yeah I do think
that's how we want to how we want to do
it.
And then on the other chart
which again I wish this was part of the
same chart. This used to all be fed in
um
the total by taxation figure.
You know you'd have
Um, instead of being F11, where's F11 up
here? It's just pulling from this.
Yeah, that's not quite right. It's
equals
F11 minus
that.
Ah,
yeah.
Now, this is wrong because it doesn't
need to be there. That's duplicating. So
that's how you get to 6.76.
And again, provisional because I got to
double check these numbers up here, but
the total raised by taxation figure is
just taking that into account because
it's up here. Shows you and it drops the
total there.
That's make. Um, did I hear somebody
raise their hand? I
don't see anything. All right.
Um,
okay. So, that
I think we're on the same page of how to
handle the uh offset provided we don't
get different information Monday night.
Oops.
It's different chart. I have too many
charts up, guys. Too many.
>> Me, too.
>> Too many charts.
All right. Uh,
back to the town budget
for a bit. Um, where were we? We had,
let's go back up here. It's all revenue
charges for services. Okay, that's all
the revenue lines. So,
you know, we talked about these.
Do we want to talk about them anymore?
I know we've talked about them in prior
meetings,
but you know,
>> thought those were thought those were
all settled.
>> Yeah, I think I think kind of asked and
answered. Um,
>> what about the project manager? Does
>> that is for a particular
>> someone
>> a road project or
>> a road project in the bridge or
>> I forget exactly what they said, but it
is for a specific project that they plan
on using this year. Like in past years,
he's budgeted for it and he has never
used it.
>> He didn't use it. That's why I was
wondering, are we going to use it this
year? I know the bridge has started. I
thought it was
>> I thought it was Bola. They were going
to work on that.
>> There's work on Bola. There's work on
Long Hill. But what I'm saying is I
don't think they even though we budgeted
for it the last couple years, we never
used it.
>> We finished Bunker Hill without using
it. Right.
>> Right. But I think it's a different
project altogether. I don't think it has
to do with the roads. I remember them
talking about it and um I remember them
saying her name
>> for I mean I don't have the minutes
>> in front of me to
>> but I know they talked
>> I would be I would be hesitant to touch
that because I remember specifically
talking about that because I was always
like yeah let's get rid of it but then I
felt that they very clearly explained
what it was for and who it was going to
>> was they were also concerned because
you're going to have a new town
administrator and they thought this
would be helpful for this person to try
and handle it instead of the new person
who was very unfamiliar.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Was there discussion about that?
Maybe
>> I remember talking that and saying that
myself. I just wasn't okay.
>> Okay.
>> That's all.
Um
All right.
Does does anybody else have any
brilliant ideas about where you want to
go next here? Because I'm not sure.
>> Uh the AHM
we should kind of figure because we're
doing four and a half%.
We need to conclude that because I don't
think you you uh adjusted the budget on
that.
>> I thought I did. Hold on. Okay.
>> You had sent an email with a figure in
it.
>> Yes.
Wasn't
this the figure?
>> 4901. You did do it.
>> Yeah, I was going to say I sent out
something that they gave to us. Unless
they had changed it.
>> Nope. No, it's at 4 and a half%. So,
that's what the 4901.
>> So, is this the number you have, Lisa?
>> Um,
I was just looking for their print out.
Hold on.
That I had that I had sent everybody.
Just
>> I want to make sure. Did I send Louise's
email to you? Um
I usually keep trying to every time I
get something that suggest there's been
a change.
>> Yep.
>> Did I send
All right, let's go back and find
Louis's email.
Nope, that's not it. Oh, no, it is.
>> Yeah,
>> that was it was the chain.
>> All right, so that's the most recent
one.
Here it is. All right, hold on. Let me
see. I've got it.
>> This is the email here. It's March 30th.
>> Oh, yes. Hold on. And
>> I don't see you on the chain, so it's
just a question whether I forwarded this
to you.
because I have from
Let's see.
You know what? I don't have I have the
letter that everybody got to that when
they're going to have their meeting. All
right.
>> And then I have youth and
>> the Youth Services Bureau.
So,
>> yeah. Uh, okay.
Well, I got to send you Louisa's email
then because
>> Well, how much how
>> it's one? All right. So, here's the
here's the correct number. Are you
ready?
>> Wait a minute. You're Are you talking
AHM Youth Services?
>> Yes.
>> Okay. Yeah. So, this does have it in
here.
2627 increase. Um, and over 112 389.
>> That's the old one. So, they changed a
little bit.
>> Oh, I didn't get
>> And I I I obviously didn't get you the
email. I've been trying to get you
everything I get in.
>> Uh, it's 111854.
>> So, it went down.
>> Yeah, a little bit.
>> Okay.
Okay.
And when was that dated?
>> March 30th.
>> Okay.
>> Or at least Hang on a minute here.
>> March 30th.
>> That's correct.
>> I believe it was March 30th.
>> Yes. Okay. I we went back and forth a
couple times that day and it gets
>> it's an increase of $4,91
>> from last year, right? It's just a
reduction from the original increase
request,
>> right?
>> Yeah.
>> All right. So, that changes our total,
right?
just tiny tiny bit. But that's that's
the sort of thing what would have
possibly driven us nuts.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah. Monday, March 30th. That's right.
>> And we are all okay with that. We're
going to keep it 4.5. We're not going to
discuss that anymore.
I just want to make sure I I could
>> Oh, I see why I couldn't find the
original email. Louis Louise had sent it
to my personal email and I had to
forward it to myself. That's why.
>> Yep. Sorry about that.
>> Okay, that was driving me bonkers.
I'm just going to forward this to you.
Uh, so you have it, Lisa.
>> Thank you. Thank you.
>> So, you could document it if you have
to.
>> Yes. Yeah.
>> And we're okay with that. Is that
correct?
>> Yes. Okay, perfect.
>> Do we need to do a formal vote for that?
>> No, I was the representative.
>> I don't think so. It's just the actual
amount that's being
>> Okay.
>> to us.
>> Yep.
>> I mean, I don't care if we want to
formalize it, but I I think
>> it's fine.
>> I think it's okay.
>> It's not us up or it's not us changing
it. It's the actual amount that we're
being charged. So yeah, I don't think we
vote on it.
>> Yeah, it's more of a charge than a Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> You take it or you don't
>> I just want to have to have another
board of finance meeting in the next
day.
>> Great.
>> You guys are fun. But
>> my party hat on, too.
So, do we want to look at any other
expenditures to try and get this budget
down, Rob, or where where are we all at?
Where's everybody feeling right now?
This is what we go to the town with. Are
we going to try and
find some revenue from the general fund
or cut any other things or we just all
this is what we're going to town with?
Well, I think we should talk about um
Andover Elementary School and the
recommendation that we made. I I think
that we should have a conversation about
that.
>> Okay.
>> We we did vote
um we voted on the 7.5. I thought that
was really fair. We worked hard to make
that recommendation. I think it's it's
fair for the community as well. I know
it's not easy.
Um, but
everybody is, you know, struggling with
debt,
bills, increases.
So, I would like for us to remain at
that 7.5%.
>> Well, again, that was a recommendation
though, Kim. We sent them a
recommendation actually cut the line
because
>> at the beginning Rob said that we were
going to proceed with
>> the understanding the way we've always
gone about it and we had the dueling
uh opinions there going on so that we
were going to send the recommendation
and my thoughts on that Kim were a lot
of people are going to be concerned
about that number. We're going to get to
the I mean we could address it right. I
don't think we have the the legal
authority, but when we're going to get
to the public meeting on Thursday next
week, people can make recommendations
and we can have a vote at that meeting
and get the the voice of the people
right then and there. Actually, at the
last meeting, Bill, we had I had asked
that question
>> if we could make a motion to reduce it,
and we were told that after the hearing,
we could do it as a motion
>> from the board
>> after the hearing by
>> after the
>> by attorney O'Brien.
>> Yes.
>> The town meeting you're talking about?
No, the hearing what you just
>> Dennis O'Brien's position is and has
been that we could theoretically do it
now. I mean, and I've I've voiced what I
thought about it. I I don't know what
else to say.
>> I have my take on it. Um
I think it I think it should go before
the town. it does go to referendum and
then the the town's folk get their say
at that point and if it comes back to us
then then we cut it. That's my take. I
understand different people have
different take. That's my understanding
of how it should work. It's what we did
last year.
That's how I would do it.
>> I'm not going to tell anybody what they,
you know, can motion or not motion. But
>> let me ask a question. Can um Kim,
according to O'Brien's opinion, can
someone at the town meeting make a
recommendation and can it be can it be
changed at the town meeting or not? Or
does it have to go
to the referendum
get bifocated and then comes back to the
board of finance and we can reduce it at
that point or can it can someone make a
motion at the town meeting?
>> Yes.
>> To lower it?
>> Yes. And it has that's been done in the
past. several times.
>> So my my suggestion would be that we let
the people speak and go with the people
at the town meeting and that way there
we're not going against this lawyer
against that lawyer. There's these
dueling opinions. It's it's legal beagle
all the way down the line. The people
get to speak and that's kind of where it
gets left.
That's what I would think. But
>> yeah, I mean
>> now my opinion would be to follow what
our town attorney had said and
>> I was just gonna say that too.
>> Yeah. And do the motion now
at this point and have the town agree or
not agree at that point at the um the
meeting next week.
>> Agree.
>> You can't because they can't increase at
the town meeting. They can only
>> That's correct. Town meeting.
>> They can only decrease at a town
meeting. I don't think it's
>> but they can vote it down.
>> Well, I think actually the charter
change provision, the charter change
provision, they can talk about it, but
it's going to go to referendum one way
or the other, I think, is actually the
way it works.
>> That's right. We voted down, then we go
back to the drawing board.
>> Liz, did you want to say something?
>> Yeah, I I wanted to I I agree. We made
the recommendation.
I I think it was
more fair than my initial
recommendation.
Um, and I think we have a town attorney
and the town attorney represents us
and I respect the opinion of the town
attorney that respects us. And he
specifically spoke to 802F
>> F,
>> which which was not considered
in his prior opinion. And in this
opinion, it states
the after the hearing, the board of
finance may review the budget requests
with the head of each department,
agency, and commission, including the
including the local board of education.
Subsequent to such hearing and review,
the board of finance shall prepare a
final budget that incorporates any
recommended changes.
and we made the recommendation. Um
I I
respect what he says. He's um he's our
town attorney. He represents us.
And the other thing I'll say um is from
a historical
just a little historical information for
anybody who's hasn't been on I mean
there's compelling arguments to increase
the budget. I've heard them and I've
heard the compelling arguments,
but going back to the 2023 2024 year end
budget, there was a surplus of 11.76%.
Um, a good chunk of that was put aside
for the bathroom project. So
AES hasn't lost anything by having
by rights we could have taken that money
and put it back into the general fund
but we didn't. We know they have
expenditures coming up. We know they
have a big project coming up. So the
board voted to put to earmark that that
money. Um
so that was a significant
surplus. If you prepare a budget like
like we're doing with Lisa based on
actuals with previous you know looking
at actuals from previous budgets you
would look and you would see where okay
well we didn't need so much here we
needed more here whatever you kind of
move forward that way. Um,
and the other point I'll make is even
last year's budget,
um,
there was only a 3.2%
surplus. However, prior to the end of
the year,
they had $249,000
in
in underbudgeted areas where they were
able to transfer to.
um
underbudgeted areas and 126,000 of that
was from salaries and two salaries and a
oh I forget what the other one was off
the top of my head. Um a teacher salary
a custodial custodial salary and nurses
salary I think.
So my concern is when we're when we're
creating a budget based on what was just
budgeted last year, you're not really
taking into account the actuals. So
because of that, I would agree
that
I would agree with with going with the
recommended the amount that we had
recommended
um
to them.
That's my That's how I feel.
>> Then I'm just going to say I think we
should put it to the people of the town,
but Rob, I think, you know, you either
call for a motion.
>> I mean, my take here is I I don't feel
like I'm repeat myself. So, you know, if
somebody wants to make a motion, we'll
entertain that motion.
Make a motion that we
move the school budget forward to the
town budget meeting at the 7.5 that we
had agreed on.
>> I'll second that.
>> That was Louise second.
>> Yeah,
>> Louise second. Liz motions. Louise
seconds.
Um
hang on one second here.
So, we've we've talked about do we have
any, you know,
>> further commentary that people would
like to make uh before we go ahead and
take a vote on this
because I mean I've
you know what my position is bills to
say. Um Heather, I don't know if you
want to say anything or if we just want
to vote. I guess I guess I would I guess
I would say I agree with Liz on some
things that the budget does seem high
and we should look at their actual but
the dueling lawyer situation
concerns me. That's just opinions of two
people and we don't actually know which
one is correct unless it went to like
court or something. I think um
so
I don't know. I just wanted to say that
that
>> that's my concern as well.
>> Yeah. Um because I mean conceptually I
honestly don't if if it anyway I I've
already I've already said it over and
over so I'm not going to do it again. Um
so why don't we go ahead and vote on
this.
Uh I'm just going to go around by who's
on the screen. So Bill, you're up first.
>> No.
>> I'm up next. No. Heather.
Um,
I'm gonna go no.
>> Liz,
>> yes.
>> Kim,
>> Louise,
>> yes.
>> Yes. And we didn't have Nick, so it's a
33.
Motion fails. 3-3. It's a tie.
>> We could always address it again if we
needed to next Wednesday. Would
>> Yes. have Nick and that would give
one more chance for everybody to be
heard at least before we go to the
referendum or to the but the meeting
then again the people who have the
chance to speak at the meeting too. So
as far as Liz and Kimberly and Louise I
don't think you know
>> what you're saying you know I don't
think it's dead in the water is what I'm
trying to say. We could address it again
with Nick and we can address it at the
town meeting. I don't think it's, you
know,
>> I just Yeah, I just feel that I think at
the town meeting it's it's going to it's
so high that people it's not going to
it's not going to pass and I'm just
trying
>> it will pass at the town meeting. It'll
pass at the town.
>> Well, the thing is the thing is the way
the charter revision works is, you know,
people get get to have their say at the
town meeting, but I think it goes to
referendum after town meeting
regardless. Yeah.
>> Used to be town meeting could reject it,
kick it back to us. It's now they can
motion they can make a motion like Liz's
motion tonight, right? That could be
made at town meeting.
>> Yeah.
>> If it passes and if it passes that's in,
>> right?
>> Goes to goes to
>> and then it goes to referendum at 7.5
for instance. Like that would happen.
>> Yeah.
>> If you had the votes. So, and then it
goes to a referendum and then I mean I I
don't I'm not going to make any grand
predictions, but I'm not I would be
completely unsurprised if it then came
back to us. Which is exactly what
happened last year.
>> Yeah.
>> Exactly.
>> That's why I don't think it's a dead
issue. That's why I think it's fair.
>> Yeah.
>> It's not a dead issue.
>> I figured that Yeah. I figured that it
would save the town so much more money
by doing something now because it most
likely the referendum is going to come
back failed and then we'll have to pay
all that extra money to redo it because
eventually I think we're going to have
to redo something
>> every time we go back to to the drawing
board. Yes. It costs money in the uh the
election people.
>> Yeah.
That's why I figured now is a good time
to do something which is fair.
That's that was my take on it.
>> Understood.
>> Okay.
>> Um
you know the other thing that we if it
does come back to us that I think we
would have to revisit is fund balance.
We made a choice and I I I happen to
agree with it that we're going to take
this forward. We're not going to
take from fund balance and make it look
prettier to get it to try to get it
through. Last year, however, but by the
end, we did use fund balance. We put
$190,000 in fund balance toward the
budget last year. So, if it comes back
and we're we're trying to get a budget
passed, that's another place we could
look. We talked about it before, you
know, I'm not making a motion or
anything like that because we there was,
I think, broad sentiment on the board
that we didn't want to go there right
now and I'm fine with that.
>> Rob, I have a question. Um, based on
what we're supposed to be presenting,
what would the mill rate be?
>> Uh, based on what we have now?
>> Yes.
>> With the RAM, I'm
>> pretty sure it's what um Oh, yeah. I
have to redo the uh the calculation a
little bit. Um it's still it's it's a it
would be a split bill rate.
It would be a split mill rate. Uh let's
see.
>> I'm sorry, but did you did you all
decide that
So, you're deciding the RAM the little
$5,000 change we're were putting in
there, correct? Up top
in that figure. The bottom is where
we're going to do the offset, but in the
top we're gonna put their new figure in
there.
>> That's where it has to go. That's the
number we're being charged this year.
Has nothing to do with the mistake.
>> Yeah, I know. It just changed. That's
all from what was in the mail.
>> That's the number that has to go in the
top.
>> So, if I've got my numbers right, and I
would still want to have Lisa double
check this one. She has time based on
the changes we talked about, little
little tweaks here or there. They're the
RAM thing. the combined mill rate would
be 33.4
which is above the cap. So you then
disagregate
uh
let's see do I have this formula
propagating? I think I do.
So if I'm right
33.52
hold on
would be the where did where I want to
look at what I had in my presentation.
So it shouldn't match that now it should
be off.
33.53 versus 33.52.
That sounds about right.
Um, so you would have a 32.46 for auto
and a 33.52 for for real estate property
if I'm if I've got the spreadsheet
working properly and I've done my math
right.
>> So what's the mill rate increase?
>> So the mill rate last year
on this chart was 31.59.
The mill rate increase which again I
mean in and of itself it doesn't really
mean much of anything. So, it's 5.72%
by mills, but that's before you split it
off. So, it gets a little complicated
with that. But the um the mill rate last
year was 31.59. So, you're going up a
little under two mills.
Um
and then you're triggering that split.
>> So, what are we going to explain to the
public? What are we what are we going to
because they're people going to ask
what's the mill rate based on that?
>> Right. Well, I mean, I had that's one
thing I had broken down in the
presentation. I mean, we can make sure
that we we're comfortable with that.
It's clear enough.
>> Yeah.
>> But I did have that in there
>> of an explanation that look, the
legislature capped
>> the auto miller at this. So, what you
have to do is you have to look at the
grand list. You have to take the total
motor vehicle. You have to multiply it
by that cap.
Then take the total degrees taxation
number, subtract the capp auto number,
and then the the rest is what you have
to raise via your house taxes,
personal property, real estate. And so
you calculate the mill rate on that, and
you get your second mill rate, which is
why in the presentation there's two
there were two mill.
>> I honestly think that's the easy part.
>> Yeah. Hey, Rob.
>> Yeah. You know what I what I would like
to do is um I'd like to add another
slide.
>> Okay.
>> Um and you and I could maybe work on it
together.
>> Sure.
>> I'd like to take I'd like to take like a
couple average houses like if your house
was worth 400,000, if your house was
worth 300 or 200 and do the calculations
so people can see what this is going to
translate to.
>> Yeah, I remember doing that a little
while back. It wasn't uh this was before
the whole split mill rate thing was
pointed out to me, but I had done it for
my own practice. So, I knew, you know, I
was like, h this will cost me about 700
bucks. That was back before the Ram
offset. It was back before the split. Of
course, I have an old cheap car, so
it'll affect me a little differently.
Um,
>> yeah,
>> you know, yes, I don't have any problem
with doing that. I think in the past,
Mark, I don't think he I don't know if
he did it last year, but it was in there
years ago. I remember we used to have a
if your house is valued at 200,000 for
tax purposes, this is what the mill rate
would do.
>> Yeah. Okay. So, we can
>> I feel like that's like the icing on the
cake. Once we have we're like sure about
our numbers
>> again and again once I'm I feel like
Lisa's had some time to verify.
>> Yeah. Next year.
>> Okay. Well,
>> yes, I do want to verify it.
There's a lot of things going on here.
There's a lot of things going on.
>> I I completely understand that. We got
to find out what comes out of Monday
night's meeting.
>> The spreadsheet.
>> We got to find out what happens at the
RAM meeting Monday night.
>> Yes.
>> Right.
>> Uh
and go from there and and get our
spreadsheets in a in a row and make sure
we're like, "Okay, everybody." I mean,
as Liz and I talked about before this
meeting, uh she likes to go through
spreadsheets and make sure they're
right, which is a good talent to have. a
good a good hobby right now. So, we need
to do that.
>> So, Mark, I mean, Mark, Rob, I just want
to agree with Liz. It does put things in
real numbers for homeowners that are
voting.
>> Yeah.
>> Puts things in in context. You can talk
about mills. It don't really tell you
anything. A mill doesn't tell you
anything. You have an evaluation next
year.
>> No, because it's Yeah, it only matters
if you know the valuation.
>> Point is that what Liz is proposing lets
people see in real dollars how it
affects them. So, I think that's a good
chart to work on.
>> I I a real fair look at what's going to
happen, whatever they're voting on, it
gives them a fair look at it. So, it's a
good chart.
>> Oh, I I I really do agree with that.
That's completely understandable. Uh,
you know, I had gone in to remind myself
of what my taxes even were. Um, in fact,
they're they're the quarterlys are due
this month. Uh, I got to go in there and
write a check. So, you know, I I
happened to know what mine were and I
was I was when we were had an earlier
iteration of this budget where we were
looking at that 9%, you know, 9.6%
increase. I did quick math, not not the
math we need to do to make that slide
actually work. Uh, and I remember it
being about 700 bucks
>> uh on the year,
>> but that was just for me.
>> Yep. So, I I was kind of hoping we could
like finish up all the nitty-gritty, all
the numbers and all the stuff tonight. I
was hoping we wouldn't have to have our
meeting next Wednesday. Do you think
that
>> that's possible?
>> The only hesitation I now have, Liz, is
um
>> RAM
>> the RAM Monday night thing,
>> could we make a
>> do we make it a short
>> So if the numbers don't change, if
they're just giving us information and
the numbers at RAM don't change, do we
really need to meet again? And if the
numbers do change again, do we really
need to meet again? We just
>> change the numbers in the Right. We just
change the numbers. I'm trying to
remember now. Don't we have 48 hours to
cancel? Like, can we cancel if we wait
till that meeting's over? Are we out of
time to cancel it?
>> I'm I mean, that's Wednesday.
Um I don't know.
>> The other option is we could all log in
and say meeting,
>> right?
>> Well, again, we can make it a short
meeting, right? We don't, you know,
>> that's true.
>> We could just make it a short meeting
and say we all agree. We we don't we're
not necessarily signing on for two
hours. If we're comfortable that we've
done everything we can do at this point
and you know we looked at we went line
by line. We've looked at capital unless
we want to revisit capital now which I'm
happy to do if people want to do it. I
don't know what I would do there uh to
find money.
>> Think I think we've been pretty
>> pretty tough with the town. I I happen
to agree the town is I mean the only
flip side you know the town is up
uh the the the operating budget's up six
the capital's down three you know and it
nets out well whatever it was it was
like that 4% number um so it's not
nothing but at the same time I do think
we've at least asked and answered
>> a lot of the questions we went through
the lines that we highlighted and and at
least discussed it and did what we could
with it
>> could be one more opportunity for for
the whole board to look at the
presentation together and just
>> I mean it could be a very short meeting
you know just to get every one last look
at the presentation and
>> my goal is to work with Liz between now
and that meeting
get the two of us happy with it and
hopefully circulate it in advance that
work
>> y
>> and you all can chime in and say I don't
really get slide 12 you know you know,
we can talk about it. If there's
significant discussion to be had, then
it's a good thing we have that meeting
to do it. But otherwise, I would hope it
to be a very quick meeting. If if we
don't if we're basically out of ideas
right now until we get town the town to
have a shot at this thing, then,
you know, it doesn't have to be a long
meeting at all. But no, Liz and I were
talking about this. I mean that that
that presentation does still need some
more work some you know to make it
really final and I'm happy to have her
help and you know try and get it where
it needs to be. I I agree with the extra
slide idea. I think we can make that
happen over the weekend into next week.
>> Yep.
>> And then again like I said we can it
will confirm the RAM numbers and then
have a short meeting on Wednesday night
just to all be on one page and move
forward. So Lisa, can I ask you a
question about our spreadsheets? Like
the proper Here I've got my spreadsheets
up, but like these are mine and I've
been monkeying around with them. So I
really want
>> I want I was just going to ask you what
your final figure is that you have cuz
we we made two changes tonight. I
believe. So I just wanted to make sure
total expens
which lines do you want totals for?
>> Grand total expenditure.
>> What I have for grand total expenditure?
Remember, we put the offset below this.
>> Yes.
>> Is 13,688,592.
>> Okay. That's not what I have.
>> What do you got?
>> Cuz I put in the I put in the new RAM
figure and that's off
>> $5,000.
>> Yes, that's less 5,000.
>> Oh, hold on. Hold on. That might be my
mistake because this I had it on one
chart but not the other. Hold up. The
two charts don't talk to each other. So,
>> yep.
>> H Where's RAM? Where's Ram? There it is.
Education. Ram, you're You got it.
Okay. What's the RAM number again?
>> Um 4258178.
Is that what I have? Let me go back up.
>> Yep.
>> Okay. And then
>> and then we made the change for AHM.
>> That one was already I think on my
chart, but I'm going to double check it
again because I'm going to be scrolling
right past it
>> because I didn't have that change.
>> 111.
>> Yeah, it should be 111.
>> Yep.
>> etc., etc. So now what's your total
expenditure?
>> 111854.
My total expenditure number now is
13,684
316.
>> Correct. Okay.
>> 6.08%.
>> Yes.
>> Huzzah.
>> Okay. Now, as far as the mil, I'm not
I'm not giving you anything tonight
because I really need to dig deep into
that one and make sure it's right.
>> It's like especially because you've got
the two different figures.
>> Yeah. and we have changed some figures.
So I really want and that taxable amount
I want to make sure that's correct. So
with that taxable amount you're saying
take off the ops out correct
>> the total raised by taxation.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. We you know I think right right
kind of right before the end is where we
want to take off the 258
etc.
>> But as far as in the mill rate sheet you
want that off of there off of the mill
rate sheet also. I I Yeah, I mean
>> Okay,
>> so here Yeah. So, hang on a second.
Hang on one second.
So, you know, my mail rat's gotten a
little busy here as you can see, but and
I've done some weird things down here by
mistake, but formatting wise, but we
have this total by taxation number.
Uh, I have it pulling the RAM levy
offset number off
to get down. Wait a minute. This seems
This seems off now. Hang on. Something
went wrong here. This went something
went wrong here.
This number is correct.
Total raised by taxation.
This number, where is this pulling from?
There's no formula in this.
So should this number here total raised
by taxes be this minus this
>> the abatesments this is a negative
number right?
>> Yes that
>> so it's like plus this.
So if that's the number
equals F11, yep, minus G28. Yep.
And that's how you get to 6.76. Huzzah.
Okay, that actually I think this checks
out. This is what I have. So this is the
with RAM levy offset total raised by
taxation number down here.
>> Let's look back at that total though.
>> Which total? Okay,
>> we just said this total is 13 684 316
>> 6 All right, let's do it right. 13
>> Yeah. 684
>> 684
>> 316
>> 316 Enter.
>> Mhm.
>> Okay.
>> Okay. Okay.
6.72.
>> Okay.
The estimated revenue hasn't changed. Uh
fund balance is still zero. Abatement
hasn't changed. Right.
So this should be a pretty simple
calculation of these three numbers,
right?
So hopefully that's correct. Total rates
by taxes.
>> And our revenue didn't change at all. Is
that correct? Just double checking.
Well, I I don't think I mean because we
didn't put the the RAM thing in the
revenue, so we left that alone, right?
>> Okay. Yeah,
>> we put that down here.
>> Okay.
>> I don't know what else would change
revenue at this point.
>> Okay. Yeah, we haven't touched it in a
long time. I was just double checking.
>> Right.
Right.
So these numbers are hopefully
wasn't this this was one we were talking
about Liz where a little unclear of
whether this is 498 or 499. We we were
looking
>> 499. It's the 499.
>> Yeah, it is the 499 number.
>> It's because because this but it's not
because this number's off. It's because
this one might be off by like two grand
or something like that.
>> Yes, the 4 million. Yeah, the 4,562
and the 4,46
from the previous years, those totals
are incorrect. And so if you do the
math, this difference doesn't add up
correctly,
>> right? But this number is accurate.
>> So there is that. This is just
>> Yeah,
>> the difference is wrong. The difference
is
correct on on the AES budget. It's
$4.99.40.
It's just that the math doesn't work if
you try to use the calculation.
>> Okay.
>> But that's not making this wrong. That's
just that's making this a little bit
off. I mean, this isn't even out to the
number of decimal places where it would
show up probably.
>> So 44 4991
is that what you put there? 4991.
>> Yeah, that's the correct number. Yeah,
that is the correct. I haven't changed
it here yet, but the the answer the
reason this is off is that this number
here, fiscal year 2526 is slightly
apparently slightly off.
>> Yeah, it's $210
off from the total. If you add up all
the numbers of the budget that year,
>> it's 2010 off.
>> Some kind of error was in the
spreadsheet. Okay, so
yeah. So, Lisa,
>> the only thing Wait a minute. Go back
down to the town budget.
Are we sure that's the total for the
town budget?
>> No, hang on. Let me double check that,
too.
>> I don't know if I'm using this in All
right, hang on. Back to the other chart.
>> Uh, municipal budget. Is that what that
line's supposed to be?
>> Yeah, it's capital and
>> Oh, okay.
>> Capital and municipal. Right.
>> Right. So what do we have?
>> Yeah.
>> So it should be
>> 4,362487
>> and I have 4 million 363022.
Could that possibly be that 5,000 again?
I don't know. Let me just um
>> um um
Okay, let's look at this. The RAM as
budget numbers
is coming from I46.
All right.
>> Yeah, those are fine. I get those. But
it's the town total
>> which includes down here. It includes
capital.
>> So
>> I don't have Yeah, that for a municipal
budget.
I have 3364272.
Isn't that what I have?
Let's see.
33. No. What have you got? No, yours is
right. Okay. Hold on.
>> Okay.
>> Cuz we made that change down in the
total before I did this. Added these two
together.
>> All right. Hold on.
So, let's do
go in and do a equals
three.
All right. Mine match. If I'm right on
one chart, I'm right on the other.
>> Yes. Now it's correct. Now, and is that
correct?
>> I just have terrible formatting. Your
total your total isn't correct, is it?
>> Which this
>> maybe my total is not correct. Now
>> my my total matches my other chart. So
if I go here
>> and I tally oops and I tally
this and this the town municipal budget
and the capital budget, right?
>> Yep.
>> Just 4989 plus 491. I you know I get
that.
I just typed it in so I could copy it.
>> So this is the number I get. So what's
what's which which one of our So if
you're not getting that number, then one
of these has to be off somewhere.
>> Let me let me check something though.
>> Okay.
>> So Rob, did you say last year that the
mill rate calculation was like connected
to this budget? So it just fed
>> Yeah, the mill rate chart was part of
this this chart used to have like a
bunch more tabs.
>> So after this is all over, can we can we
work on making this easier? I would like
I would like once we get through this
I'm I'm you know I'm extending I
understand what Lisa is dealing with but
going forward in future. Yes. I would
like
>> I would like my chart back together.
>> Hold on.
>> Yes. Yeah. It's really nice when all the
tabs funnel into the main
>> and the formulas feed so that if you
make a change
>> Yes.
And if memory serves, the other thing
that used to be in here was a whole
bunch of detailed sub sheets from the
various departments.
>> Yep.
>> Yeah.
>> I mean, I I know we have the old ones. I
I you know, this got built from kind of
from scratch almost, I think, this year.
Um, and I won't blind as to why that
happened, but there were old charts
that,
>> you know, I think I've said I sent sent
you some like this is how we used to do
it and how we kind of like it and I'm
open to changes, but yeah, that one
getting
the tax the taxation chart back on the
in in the spreadsheet in the budget
spreadsheet would be would be great at
some point.
>> Can you go back to your mill mil mill
rate,
>> Rob? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think I think
I'm Let's see.
No, I still don't have what you have.
Hold on. 50634258
4362487.
I'm still getting
506 4258 and 436.
>> We're off on on this line.
We're off on the total and over budget
that down there. I
>> 31 line.
>> Yeah, that 13 684 316.
Isn't that what we said it was?
>> Back to the chart.
>> Total total and over budget is off.
That's right. That's correct. It's in
your
>> mill 684 316.
>> That's correct. Go to your mill rate
though. And that's not what you're
getting down here down below right
there. You're not. That's not what you
have there.
>> All right. Hang on. Let me
>> Yeah,
>> let me get it right.
>> Yeah.
>> 13684
316. Right.
>> Yes.
>> Okay.
>> Oh, come on. I'll just I'll just type
it. 13684
>> 316. Yeah, there you go. There. And now
my other numbers are okay. All right.
All right.
Um, the only other thing that I kind of
don't like,
like me, I just sat here and I do
numbers. I got to the I added the RAM,
the Andover Elementary, the Ram, and
then there's all that calculation and no
one knows whether or not they're adding
the 4258 or the 399 because really that
that's not in that figure
of 43. I I don't know. It just gets I
don't know if we should almost and I can
do it at another point. I don't want to
hold everybody up, but I still think we
might want to put it separate below
because I think that's going to confuse
people with it in there like that
>> because the figure you're really using,
you want your expenditures to stay true.
So, you don't want to introduce that 258
negative until underneath.
>> That's why they're going to go, "Wait a
minute, that doesn't add up." Right.
>> I I am happy to move this, Lisa. I'll
take any advice you want to have on
that. That's totally fine. I wanted to
make sure it knitted out properly, so
this number was right.
>> Yep.
>> Um,
but you No, that's fine. Uh, if this
goes here instead,
I'm okay with that.
>> Yes. Yeah, that's what I think because
we kind of did that with the total page
on the book, too. So,
>> but then do we put the total?
>> No, you don't. You put it above the
fund, you skip a line, you put it above
the fund balance. So you don't bring in
that fund balance and so
>> you put it in here. You put it in here.
>> Insert a line there. Yes.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah.
>> Well, I'm open to that.
>> Uh
did you have this you have your version
of this chart?
>> Yes. Yep.
>> Uh the only difference is, you know, I
was screwing around with mill rate
calculations over here. You don't
necessarily need that. I want you to
reproduce it anyway. So you've got your
chart. Your chart is is the gospel,
right? Mine is
Mine is me doing my best, but I want you
to be the you are the keeper of the of
the real one.
>> Yeah. I just wanted to make sure we were
the same. Okay.
>> No, I appreciate
>> Now we're different. Yeah. Okay. Now
we're the same. Okay.
>> Okay.
All right.
So, all right. In terms of process,
Liz and I will work on the presentation.
Lisa when to the extent she's able
>> can work on double check and format
>> y
>> the charts to be right and as best
practice. I guys unless anybody else
disagrees I'm fine with moving the RAM
levy offset stuff down here. That's fine
by me. However is the cleanest way. I
don't want to confuse people. I want
people to understand what we're doing.
>> Yeah.
>> Um Liz and I work on the presentation.
Those of us who can, everybody who can
manage it, who can show up Monday night
to that RAM meeting,
>> is that posted on our website under the
same calendar, the RAM meeting?
>> I don't know. It it I think that email
just came out today. Um
>> I know it will be posted on our Does
anybody know does that get posted on
>> That's a darn good question. Um hang on,
let me stop sharing so we can get the
linkage and all that or
>> Let me um
>> The link is in the in the email. in the
email
from Colin, which I forwarded you guys,
but uh
>> I'm just looking at who he sent this to.
>> He sent it to to me, Jeff Maguire,
and kind of our colleagues around the
town. He sent it to Val, and I assume
all the people down here are uh uh you
know, the school supers and and what
have you. What I don't see is like this
isn't I Kate doesn't have this yet.
Um,
I don't know. I mean, it's not our
meeting, but I could forward it to her
and say, "Hey, is there any way we could
display this somewhere on the
You know what the real problem is?"
Whether she'll have time to do it
between now and Monday night, but I I'll
I'll send it on, see what she says. Does
that Does that work?
Anybody got a thought on that?
>> Works.
Are you sending this? You know, I'm just
thinking
>> I thought when you post for the town
meeting, you have those figures and you
can't change them till after the town
meeting. Uh that that's maybe it's a
different charter. I don't know. But you
have to these figures that we're
changing. I'm just kind of worried. But
>> well, we haven't gone to town meeting
yet, right? So
>> when you post Okay, maybe I'm thinking
referendum.
>> Yeah,
>> I don't know. But I think there a
certain time you have to have those.
>> I think we're okay to tweak them right
up until town meeting. I mean, we were
catching we've caught errors the day of.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah,
>> that's my take. Um,
>> take good notes Monday night because I
will have five grandchildren with me and
I don't think I'll be I don't think I'll
get much if I sign on. So,
>> I suspect you won't.
>> Twins. So, I I I will have them until
nine o'clock. So,
>> Rob, do we want to move to our um public
speak or
>> I mean, yeah, I was going to say I Yeah,
I can do the email to Kate later. Uh if
if I just want to make sure nobody on
the board has any further thoughts,
discussion, anything else they want to
bring up before we go to public speak.
Yeah.
I'm good.
>> All right,
I'll go around. Uh, let's see. Scott,
>> nothing. Thank you. Thanks for the hard
work.
>> Joanne,
>> hey. Um,
thank you. I I guess I thought I was
going to see a little more work
happening. I understand, you know, I
just think this is
I'm worried about this budget just
because of this budget going to town
meeting if it passes there, you know, I
mean, and there's no real vote, like I
said, you know, like I'm I'm kind of in
agreement with Liz. I don't I think that
there probably won't be cuts there. I
mean, people do make motions and things
of that nature. Then it'll go to
referendum. This very well could be the
budget you all are given to the town
this year, you know, because
and if it passes, it passes. I just
thought we were you were going to look
at it a little tighter tonight all
around. I understand that you are
waiting to maybe cut the board of ed or
certain members of you, you know,
because I've been watching and I I know
what everybody's thinking and kind of
how, you know, I've gotten to know you
through the years. Um, I just thought a
little more close observation was going
to be taken at some of the capital funds
this year or maybe, you know, just
tightening up a couple couple things.
That's all. I mean, it is what it is and
and it's going to town meeting unless
you do make some changes, but I was kind
of on the line what Bill was saying. I
wish it could have gotten down to one
mil rate. It's just the biggest increase
I've ever seen. So, again, that's I know
you're all working hard and everybody
has their own idea of where they want to
see cuts. So, I 100% respect that. I've
told you all that I thought could be
tweaked a little bit and I supported all
of you. So, I just thought a little more
was going to come off, but it is what it
is and we'll see what happens. Thank
you.
>> Thanks, Joanne.
Marcy,
>> hi. Um, yeah, I appreciate all the work
you guys are doing. Uh, the only thing
that I wanted to say was the um
something that nobody's ever mentioned
about the um problem with the RAM and
what they're going to do with all that.
Uh,
I wonder if there's people that may have
been living in town for like four or
five years and have moved out and
wouldn't they want a refund?
So, that that's what goes through my
mind is, you know, we've been
overcharged all these years and yeah,
sure, come off next budget, but you
know, what about those kinds of
situations? So anyway, I know it's not
your decision, but I mean it's a
thought. So thanks.
>> Thanks, Marcy.
Valerie.
>> Hi. Thanks. Can you hear me?
>> Can.
>> Okay. Um, so I just wanted to comment on
a couple of things. We we had a a a
conversation um by a couple of board
members on surpluses and actuals. Um,
and obviously I represent the school
side. So
the thing is about the surpluses,
there's a lot of talk from a few members
of the board of finance on the year that
we had a large surplus. And although the
board of ed could have done something
with that prior to the end of the fiscal
year, we met with you guys and said,
"Let's be responsible with the taxpayer
dollar and put it aside for something in
the future that would defay the cost to
the taxpayer,
but the town has also had surpluses over
the years. And I just don't want there
to be a double standard when we're
talking about surpluses because if you
made a chart, you would see that there
are surpluses on both of those budgets
year after year. And so I think that
that's something that if we are going to
have that conversation, it does have to
not be a double standard and we have to
make sure that we look at both. As far
as the actuals go, that isn't a way for
the school to budget. I'll give you a
quick example and then I'll explain what
I mean. If every week a family has $50
in their grocery bill for diapers, it's
$50, it's $50, it's $50. And then one
week they go to the store and it's $30
because they're on sale. The following
week you don't budget based on the
actual from the week before, which was
$30. You budget based on $50
because it was an oddity that you had
$30 the week before. And so when we're
looking at actuals, we have to take two
things into consideration. That is, was
there an oddity that occurred to cause
that actual not to be as high as it was
the year before? But we also have grants
that come in. So a $100,000 that might
have been reduced in a salary wasn't
necessarily not an actual. It was placed
in a grant revenue. and therefore our
actuals were in fact the right amount.
It's just not offset in the general
fund. And you did a lot of work. I I've
watched your budget meetings. You've
done a lot of work with looking at the
town side. But there were times too
there where the actuals from two years
earlier were much lower than what was
being put in this year's budget. and you
had to talk through the why and say,
"Well, sure, it was only $5,000 for two
years, but we're putting $10,000 in now,
but here's why." And we have that as
well. So,
that is all I would like people to
realize is when talking about surpluses,
there have been surpluses on both sides
before. And when looking at actuals, the
general fund actuals don't necessarily
reflect all of the expenditures that we
had. So, thank you and thank you for
your time.
All right.
Did I miss anyone of the public? I don't
think I did, but speak up now if I did.
Anybody? Anybody?
All right. I think we have our game plan
for what it's worth. Um, do we have a
motion to adjourn the meeting?
>> Motion to adjurnn.
>> Bill Johnny on the spot. Do we have a
second?
Louise, I think, raised her hand.
>> Louise is raising her hand. She's just
muted.
>> Okay.
>> All right. We'll we'll count that
though. Louise, I saw your hand.
>> All right. All in favor? Bill?
>> I.
>> Me? I. Louise.
>> Liz.
>> Yes. I.
>> Heather.
>> Yes.
>> Kim.
>> That's 6. And we of course are missing
Nick. So that's all we've got. All
right, everybody. I'm going to end the
meeting. We're going to kill the
recording here. Stop recording.